SPEC-1768 add a metadataClient for CSFLE (#888)
mongodb/specifications: source/client-side-encryption/client-side-encryption.rst

      // Implementation details.
      private mongocrypt_t libmongocrypt_handle; // Handle to libmongocrypt.
      private Optional<MongoClient> mongocryptd_client; // Client to mongocryptd.

>       private MongoClient keyvault_client; // Client used to run find on the key vault collection. This is either an external MongoClient or internal_client.

Reviewer: If I had been a reviewer on the original spec, I would have asked that this be named `key_vault_client`, but since it predates this change, I'll accept it as it is

      private MongoClient metadata_client; // Client used to run listCollections. This is either the parent MongoClient or internal_client.

>       private Optional<MongoClient> internal_client; // An internal MongoClient. An internal MongoClient. Created if no external keyVaultClient was set, or if a metadataClient is needed

Reviewer 2: Nit: duplicated "An internal MongoClient."
```suggestion
      private Optional<MongoClient> internal_client; // An internal MongoClient. Created if no external keyVaultClient was set, or if a metadataClient is needed
```

keys are protected with encryption by a KMS provider (AWS KMS, Azure key
vault, GCP KMS, or a local master key).

> metadataClient

Reviewer 3: This deserves a minor version bump.  Also, it's a big enough change that at least one other driver should implement before we push this to master

Author: Oh good point, I bumped the version to 1.3.0.

I agree, I'll hold off merging until another driver implements this. It was a small change in Go (mostly following suit with how the `keyVaultClient` is handled).

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A client used to run ``listCollections`` to determine whether a collection has
an associated JSON schema with encrypted fields specified.

> If a ``metadataClient`` is not set, and ``bypassAutomaticEncryption=false`` then

Reviewer: From reading this section several times, I'm still not sure I understand exactly what the configuration will be in every case:

1. metadataClient is passed in by user, bypassAutomaticEncryption=false
2. metadataClient is passed in by user, bypassAutomaticEncryption=true
3. metadataClient is not passed in by user, bypassAutomaticEncryption=false
4. metadataClient is not passed in by user, bypassAutomaticEncryption=true

As best as I can tell, the first two cases are the same, i.e. the metadataClient is used for running `listCollections`. In case 3, it sounds like the driver is supposed to create a new client interally and set `metadataClient` to that. I'm not sure about the fourth case; does `bypassAutomaticEncryption` mean that `listCollections` won't occur?

Either way, only one of the four cases is explicitly defined here (case 3), and the other cases are left implicit. One thing that's not clear is if the driver is supposed to actually populate `metadataClient` in the case that none is passed in or if it should just substitute `internal_client` at the places where `metadataClient` would normally be used. If the former, I think the language here should be updated to "If a `metadataClient` is not passed in..." (rather than "is not set"), and if the latter, think the docstring on `metadataClient` above should be revised to be clear that the value is not actually set to the value of internal_client.

Author: Great points, I think enumerating the cases is helpful. I described this behavior with pseudo-code in a separate section to show the configuration behavior with `metadataClient`, `keyVaultClient`, and the internal client. Hopefully that clarifies.

> does bypassAutomaticEncryption mean that listCollections won't occur?

Yes, `listCollections` is only run for automatic encryption.

> One thing that's not clear is if the driver is supposed to actually populate metadataClient in the case that none is passed in or if it should just substitute internal_client at the places where metadataClient would normally be used. If the former, I think the language here should be updated to "If a metadataClient is not passed in..." (rather than "is not set"), and if the latter, think the docstring on metadataClient above should be revised to be clear that the value is not actually set to the value of internal_client.

The former, I've updated the language.

> an internal ``MongoClient`` is used internally with the same options as the

Reviewer 3: That's one too many "internals" in this sentence.

Author: Doh, fixed.

excluding the ``AutoEncryptionOpts``.

Drivers MUST document this behavior, using the following as a template:

   If the ``MongoClient`` is configured with ``AutoEncryptionOpts`` with

>    ``bypassAutomaticEncryption=false`` then a ``metadataClient`` is necessary. If a

Reviewer: By "is necessary", does that mean drivers should throw an error if none is passed in? If so, I think that should be explicitly stated

   ``metadataClient`` is not passed as an option, a separate ``MongoClient`` is
   used internally. It is configured using the options of the parent ``MongoClient``
   with the ``AutoEncryptionOpts`` omitted.

See `What's the deal with metadataClient, keyVaultClient, and the internal client?`_

keyVaultClient
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The key vault collection is assumed to reside on the same MongoDB
cluster as indicated by the connecting URI. But the optional
keyVaultClient can be used to route data key queries to a separate
MongoDB cluster.

A ``keyVaultClient`` is necessary for both automatic encryption and decryption.

> If a ``keyVaultClient`` is not set then an internal ``MongoClient`` is used the

Reviewer 3: "is used with"

Author: Done.

same options as the parent ``MongoClient`` excluding the ``AutoEncryptionOpts``.

Drivers MUST document this behavior, using the following as a template:

>    If the ``MongoClient`` is configured with ``AutoEncryptionOpts`` with a

Reviewer 3: with -> then

Author: Done.

>    ``keyVaultClient`` is necessary. If a ``keyVaultClient`` is not passed as an

Reviewer: Ditto above comment about "is necessary"

keys are protected with encryption by a KMS provider (AWS KMS, Azure key
vault, GCP KMS, or a local master key).

> metadataClient

Reviewer 2: I get why we expose the `metadataClient` option, but I think this needs some additional language to guard against (very) invalid use-cases. Consider the following snippet:

```
metadataClient = new Client("mongodb://server1:27017", minPoolSize=2);
client = new Client("mongodb://server2:27017", maxPoolSize=1, metadataClient);
```

The fact that users would be able to direct the metadata client to a separate server concerns me. Depending on how feasible it is to guard against this in different drivers, we may want to consider exposing only a `metadataClientOptions` options that allows overriding options used for constructing the internal metadata client instead of allowing to specify a client object. This would allow users to do this:
```
client = new Client("mongodb://server2:27017", maxPoolSize=1, metadataClientOptions={minPoolSize=2, maxPoolSize=5})
```

Reviewer 3: This could be a big headache for Java and .NET drivers.  Both of them use a MongoClientSettings class that encompasses optional values and required values like credentials and hosts.  Would this require duplicating that whole structure into one that included everything but the hosts and credentials?

Author: Yes I think so. Is that any harder than copying a `MongoClientSettings` and excluding `AutoEncyptionOpts`? That's already necessary for the current proposed change to configure the internal client.

Reviewer 3: I think that's different.  In that case we're just copying the values from one MongoClientSettings into another, and excluding AutoEntrypOps.  in this case, do drivers have to provide a public API that excludes the possibility of configuring different hosts?  Or could the driver just ignore the configured hosts? Or am I misunderstanding this completely?

Author: I see what you mean.

Ignoring the configured `hosts` and `credentials` seems like a weird API that ignores a core part of the `MongoClientSettings`.

We want to expose an option that:
1. Let's users completely configure the internal `MongoClient` (notably to configure the connection pool sizes, since `listCollections` / `find` on the key vault will likely be much less frequent then normal `MongoClient` operations)
2. Does not have ignored options
3. Does not permit misuse (via connecting to the wrong cluster)

If that requires non-trivial driver changes, I am in favor of not exposing any configuration, and instead choosing sensible defaults.

If we need an internal client, copy the `MongoClient` options. Exclude `AutoEncryptionOpts`. Set `minPoolSize` to 0.

It's one less knob. And if we determine that we need additional configuration later, we can add it.

Author: 68374f8 proposes not exposing `metadataClient`.

   If ``keyVaultClient`` is not passed as an option, a separate ``MongoClient``
   is used internally. It is configured using the options of the parent
   ``MongoClient`` with the ``AutoEncryptionOpts`` omitted.

See `What's the deal with metadataClient, keyVaultClient, and the internal client?`_

keyVaultClient, metadataClient, and the internal MongoClient
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If a ``keyVaultClient`` is not passed, it is set to an internal ``MongoClient``.

If a ``metadataClient`` is not passed, and ``bypassAutomaticEncryption=false``,
it is set to an internal ``MongoClient``. If ``bypassAutomaticEncryption=true``,
the option is ignored since ``listCollections`` is only run during automatic
encryption.

The ``keyVaultClient`` and ``metadataClient`` MUST be set to the same internal
``MongoClient`` if neither are passed in and ``bypassAutomaticEncryption=false``.

The internal ``MongoClient`` MUST be configured with the same options as the
parent ``MongoClient`` with the ``AutoEncryptionOpts`` excluded.

The following pseudo-code describes the configuration behavior:

.. code::

>    def getOrCreateInternalClient (client, clientOpts):

Reviewer 2: Food for thought: from my understanding, the problem arises when specifying `maxPoolSize` in the original client options. If these are not passed, is there a reason for creating a separate client? Could we reuse the original client in those cases to save resources?

Author: Yes, we could reuse the original client.

It might not be a less important use case to account for. `maxPoolSize` defaults to `100`. If a user explicitly opts into `maxPoolSize=0`, they may not be concerned with extra connections. OTOH, they may be configuring with a large `minPoolSize` as well.

I'll account for this if it does not add much more complexity.

Author: This has been accounted for in 68374f8

keyVaultClient can be used to route data key queries to a separate
MongoDB cluster.

If a ``keyVaultClient`` is not passed, and the parent ``MongoClient`` is
configured with a limited ``maxPoolSize``, the ``keyVaultClient`` is set to an
internal ``MongoClient``. See `keyVaultClient, metadataClient, and the internal
MongoClient`_ for configuration behavior.

See `What's the deal with metadataClient, keyVaultClient, and the internal client?`_

keyVaultClient, metadataClient, and the internal MongoClient
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following pseudo-code describes the configuration behavior for the three ``MongoClient``s:

.. code::

   def getOrCreateInternalClient (client, clientOpts):
      if client.internalClient != None:
         return client.internalClient

>       internalClientOpts = copy(clientOpts)

Reviewer 4: Does any spec standardize what the `clientOpts` are? Seems like this refers to URI options + other options that can be supplied to MongoClient?
When creating the new client, are we expected to use the host/port supplied to the original MongoClient or are expected instead to create a new topology for the seeds/nodes that are known at the time of internal MongoClient creation? AFAICT, those two could be different so having the spec be more explicit in this regard would be helpful.

Author: Good question. AFAIK, no spec standardizes all client options. I added a section below to describe the intended behavior. That the internal client should use the same configuration supplied to the parent `MongoClient`.

I do not think it makes much of an observable difference whether we use the original host information, or if we use the seeds/nodes known at the time of constructing the internal `MongoClient`. But if the internal `MongoClient` is configured during construction, I think it may make implementations simpler to always use the original host info from the URI.

Reviewer 4: I just want the spec to specifically mention what do. I agree that since the internal client will be created at (almost) the same time as the parent MongoClient bearing the `AutoEncryptionOpts`, use of the original host/port vs the currently discovered nodes wouldn't necessarily matter.

internal ``MongoClient``. See `keyVaultClient, metadataClient, and the internal
MongoClient`_ for configuration behavior.

See `What's the deal with metadataClient, keyVaultClient, and the internal client?`_

keyVaultClient, metadataClient, and the internal MongoClient
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following pseudo-code describes the configuration behavior for the three ``MongoClient``s:

.. code::

   def getOrCreateInternalClient (client, clientOpts):
      if client.internalClient != None:
         return client.internalClient
      internalClientOpts = copy(clientOpts)
      internalClientOpts.autoEncryptionOpts = None
      internalClientOpts.minPoolSize = 0
      client.internalClient = MongoClient (internalClientOpts)
      return client.internalClient

   def configureAutoEncryptionClients (client, clientOpts):
      if clientOpts.autoEncryptionOpts.keyVaultClient != None:
         client.keyVaultClient = clientOpts.autoEncryptionOpts.keyVaultClient
      elif clientOpts.maxPoolSize == 0:
         client.keyVaultClient = client
      else:
         client.keyVaultClient = getOrCreateInternalClient (client, clientOpts)

>       if clientOpts.autoEncryptionOpts.bypassAutomaticEncryption:

Reviewer 5: the new value from AutoEncryptionOpts is not used?

Reviewer 5: I meant this value: https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/pull/888/files#diff-de01d398114f63480af23798e09ffca599aa758efd04f15a9beec89b4566041bR252

Author: Ah right! That was leftover from a prior change and should not be in `AutoEncryptionOpts`. It is removed.

Because single threaded drivers may exceed ``serverSelectionTimeoutMS`` by the
duration of the topology scan, ``connectTimeoutMS`` is also reduced.

What's the deal with metadataClient, keyVaultClient, and the internal client?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

When automatically encrypting a command, the driver runs:
- a ``listCollections`` command to determine if the target collection
has a remote schema. This uses the ``metadataClient``.
- a ``find`` against the key vault collection to fetch keys. This uses the
``keyVaultClient``.

> **Why not reuse the parent MongoClient?**

Reviewer 3: Funny character?

Author: It's a `?`. I'm not sure why it appears that way in the diff. Either way, I changed this to be a sub-heading instead of bold, so it can be linked to.

These operations MUST NOT reuse the same connection pool as the parent
``MongoClient`` configured with automatic encryption to avoid possible deadlock
situations.

Drivers supporting a connection pool (see `CMAP specification
</source/connection-monitoring-and-pooling/connection-monitoring-and-pooling.rst>`_)
support an option for limiting the connection pool size: ``maxPoolSize``.

Drivers need to check out a connection before serializing the command. If the
``listCollections`` or ``find`` command during automatic encryption uses the same
connection pool as the parent MongoClient, the application is susceptible to

> deadlocks.

Reviewer 3: It it, technically, a deadlock given that the checkout will eventually time out?

Author: If there is a `waitQueueTimeoutMS` set, then it would be a timeout instead of a deadlock. The default behavior is a deadlock though, since `waitQueueTimeoutMS` defaults to "no limit": https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/connection-monitoring-and-pooling/connection-monitoring-and-pooling.rst#connection-pool-options-1

Using the same connection pool causes automatic encryption to check out multiple
connections from the pool when processing a single command. If maxPoolSize=1,
this is an immediate deadlock. If maxPoolSize=2, and two threads check out the
first connection, they will deadlock attempting to check out the second.

> **Why are keyVaultClient and metadataClient separate exposed options?**

Reviewer 3: Funny character

Author: Updated to a heading.

The ``keyVaultClient`` supports the use case where the key vault collection is
stored on a MongoDB cluster separate from the data-bearing cluster.

The ``metadataClient`` is only used for ``listCollections`` against the
data-bearing cluster.

``listCollections`` responses are cached by libmongocrypt for one minute.

The use pattern of the ``metadataClient`` will likely greatly differ from
the parent ``MongoClient``.

This is an exposed option to provide a way for users to configure (e.g. set a
lower ``minPoolSize`` to avoid additional connections).

**Why is the metadataClient not needed if bypassAutoEncryption=true**

Because automatic decryption does not require the JSON schema.
``listCollections`` is not run during automatic encryption.

**Can the keyVaultClient and the metadataClient be the same?**

Technically yes, but not all drivers support this. In some drivers, the
``keyVaultClient`` and ``metadataClient`` is configured by passing client
options, instead of a client object.

> If a ``metadataClient`` is passed, but a ``keyVaultClient`` is set, it would be

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this paragraph.

Author: The point I want to make is that we could optimize out an extra client, but I'm proposing not to.

In particular, if you set a `metadataClient`, but do not set a `keyVaultClient`, we _could_ internally reuse the `metadataClient` to serve as the `keyVaultClient` (instead of creating an internal client for `keyVaultClient`).

It's a caveat I'm willing to hash out if there is disagreement. But I tried clarifying this paragraph.

connections from the pool when processing a single command. If maxPoolSize=1,
this is an immediate deadlock. If maxPoolSize=2, and two threads check out the
first connection, they will deadlock attempting to check out the second.

Why is keyVaultClient an exposed option, but metadataClient private?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``keyVaultClient`` supports the use case where the key vault collection is
stored on a MongoDB cluster separate from the data-bearing cluster.

The ``metadataClient`` is only used for ``listCollections`` against the
data-bearing cluster.

``listCollections`` responses are cached by libmongocrypt for one minute.

The use pattern of the ``metadataClient`` will likely greatly differ from
the parent ``MongoClient``. So it is configured with ``minPoolSize=0``.

The ``metadataClient`` is not an exposed option because a user could
misconfigure it to point to another MongoDB cluster, which could be a 
security risk.

Why is the metadataClient not needed if bypassAutoEncryption=true
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Because automatic decryption does not require the JSON schema.
> ``listCollections`` is not run during automatic encryption.

Reviewer 2: I believe this paragraph is incorrect. `listCollections` is run during automatic encryption, hence it being unnecessary if `bypassAutoEncryption` is true. Suggested wording:

```suggestion
JSON schema data is only needed for automatic encryption but not for automatic
decryption. ``listCollections`` is not run when ``bypassAutoEncryption`` is
``true``, making a metadataClient unnecessary.
```
